Horror has always been an inherently traditionalistic
genre, since fear is an inherently traditional,
conservative emotion, and horror is often
used for preserving traditional values: the
victory of those who are virtuous, the punishment
of those who are wicked, and rejection of
the “other”.
Nevertheless, for centuries, queerness and
horror have been inextricably linked.
With horror relying on queerness for shock
value, and queerness relying on horror for
visibility and validation.
The horror genre we know today has its roots
in the eighteenth-century romance and Gothic
genres, the more gruesome works of Shakespeare,
as well as the works of Dante, which described
in graphic detail the torments of Hell that
await those who sin.
But the arrival of the printing press spurred
a demand for long-format literature.
Enter the Gothic genre, and the growing dominance
of the novel as the go-to English language
prose-fiction format.
More demand meant more authors.
More authors meant more voices.
Namely, queer voices.
However, we would only step into the spotlight
as one of the few great leading roles we were
allowed to fully inhabit: The Villain.
Queer attraction and subtext could suddenly
be explored in works like Sheridan Le Fanu's
Carmilla, Oscar Wilde's The Picture of Dorian
Gray, and Bram Stoker's Dracula, and queer
characters could take a role at the heart
of the story, albeit as predatory monsters
with perverse desires.
LGBT authors discovered that we could operate
within the constraints of this most conservative
genres, utilizing metaphor and coding to depict
our queer culture…
For a while, it was preferable to be seen
as a monster rather than to go unnoticed.
However, in our eagerness to use the genre
to depict some element of ourselves, we most
frequently revealed our self-hatred, the stinging
toxin gay readers were obliged to ingest in
order to fulfill our desire to see ourselves.
Into the early 1900s, through two world wars
and the extremely conformist 1950s and early
1960s, so-called sexual deviation and perversity
continued to play a prominent part in the
horror genre.
As novels, movies, and television became increasingly
permissive, graphic depictions of passionate
lesbian vampires, pansexual covens, mother-obsessed
maniacs, and cross-dressing cannibals startled
and titilated mainstream audiences... while
infuriating censors, and many in the queer
community alike.
But the anti-hero was becoming a prominent
protagonist now, and the prim, prudish, heterosexual
heroes of the past were ridiculed for being
painfully boring, while the bizarre monsters
and murderers were applauded for their defiance
of societal conventions.
Up until then, families were considered a
perfect microcosm of society.
Sacred.
A source of power and security.
The heroes would do whatever was required
to defeat the monster and restore order, including
sacrificing themselves.
But then a transition took place.
We went from 'killing the deviant to save
the family and society' to the insinuation
that family and society was where the deviance
lay, and that they may destroy you.
Rosemary’s Baby, Carrie, The Exorcist, The
Shining, and The Omen.
In these stories, family and society were
where the monsters were made… through divorce,
abuse, or neglect… through isolation and
exclusion, and especially through a disregard
for and degradation of the rules of gender
and sexual identity that “good families”
obeyed.
This was the new order of things in horror.
These stories were in high contrast with those
of decades prior, where the monster was still
an external force we could fight and destroy.
In recent years, the queer villain/anti-hero
has made an interesting and largely welcome
return within horror, as we have seen an increase
in the psychological complexity of its monsters
and the conflicted nature of its heroes and
victims.
Anne Rice’s vampires come to mind as an
example, as well as Bryan Fuller’s TV series,
Hannibal.
In pervious horror-themed videos I’ve discussed
the drawn empathy between queer peoples and
monsters.
We see ourselves in monsters because we have
also been cast out of society.
We’ve been decreed unfit for all audiences,
something we must protect women and children
from.
We must be regulated, and if necessary, slain
— for no other reason than how we are different
from society’s expectations.
So we look at Frankenstein’s creation and
think, well, I’m also a social outcast,
and I have feelings.
I have a heart, and aspirations, social needs,
and dreams of living a good life.
Shouldn’t that mean that he does also?
But there’s something that’s overlooked.
That queer people are fundamentally the same
as straight people.
And just as there is narcissism, ego, exploitation,
and abuse among straight people — When it
comes to queer people… sometimes a monster…
is just a monster.
It’s like we — queer people in our relationships
— are so conditioned to seeing the person
behind the monster that we overlook the elements
that are genuinely monstrous because to us,
as historical societal outcasts who lacked
connection to human society at large, we value
the human connection enough to tolerate or
even condone monstrous behaviour.
And yes, we’re always on the lookout for
monsters who want to eat your heart.
But far more insidious is the monster that
wants to eat your mind.
Your self worth.
And we seem to be very comfortable with those
monsters.
Over the course of its three seasons, Hannibal,
lead by out gay show-runner Bryan Fuller,
made a significant impact on both the horror
and crime drama fandoms.
With a focus on comprehending the psychology
of serial killers — the driving line of
the show was built around learning how to
develop human connections with people who
lack humanity.
Empathy for those who cannot empathize.
The emotional through-line of the show, however,
is built around the relationship between the
titular antagonist Hannibal Lecter, and the
Psychological Profiler Will Graham.
In the book Red Dragon the story begins, and
the infamous Dr. Lecter — Hannibal the Cannibal
— is incarcerated.
Will Graham is recruited by the FBI to track
down a serial killer, and it’s referenced
that this is not the first time the FBI has
approached Will for consultation.
Apparently, Will and the FBI had worked with
Hannibal Lecter, who was a practicing psychiatrist,
to profile one of a number of serial killers.
Eventually, Will realized it was Hannibal
who was the killer that they were tracking,
and Hannibal nearly killed him before he was
arrested.
The result was a complete fallout with the
FBI, and Will himself coping with the trauma
for years before Agent Jack Crawford tracked
him down again to help with a case.
But through the mystery of the Red Dragon,
there are constant call backs to Will’s
work with the FBI and his twisted relationship
with Hannibal, which… it’s hinted... that
they were much closer than we’re being led
to believe.
The Hannibal TV series for NBC focused around
filling in these plot details.
What would a relationship between Hannibal
and Will be like?
How did they get to that point in Red Dragon?
What did it take to bring Hannibal down?
And most importantly, appropriately presenting
Will Graham in a way that honours his collection
of neurotic behaviours that were outlined
in the book.
In the series, Will Graham is a cocktail of
personality disorders, as he describes, closer
to autism and aspergers than an antisocial
personality disorder.
Will is able to look at a setting, and accurately
describe an individual based on cues within
the scene.
Now while this could do wonders on Drag Race
for reading the other queens—
—this has a very practical application for
crime scene investigation.
By looking at the scene of a murder, Will
can slip into the mind of the killer.
He can observe clues, see the sequence of
the events, and then construct the psychological
profile of the person who did the murder based
on who he becomes while he re-expiriences
it.
Developing a profile of a serial killer is
useful in determining how they select their
targets.
Given how most serial killers operate, figuring
out how they select their victims could lead
investigators to where the serial killers
live, or intercept them before they kill again.
From observing these crime scenes, Will can
figure out how they think and what they think
about their victims.
Will, from a perspective of self-analysis,
reports to the FBI what he feels and thinks
when he re-lives the murder.
A psychological profile is constructed based
on who Will says he becomes.
In the mythology of the show, Will’s perspective
is second-to-none.
Now, for Will, that does mean that he has
to distance himself from his own mind and
take on the world view of people who conduct
very… elaborate crimes.
Naturally this kind of identity flux is of
immense interest to Dr. Hannibal Lecter, who
first wants to study Will, but then as he
learns the extent of Will’s ability, begins
to feel the need to transform Will.
Hannibal has an unparalleled capacity to read
and interpret body language.
Contrast to Will’s ability to construct
human models based on reading environment.
He sees Will’s neurotic behaviour as the
result of Will rejecting elements of his own
identity.
Hannibal feels that Will's ability to see
into the heads of serial killers is an indication
that Will is drawn to these people — and
that Will can only be his true self while
he is re-experiencing these murders.
The show is ambiguous about whether this is
or is not, in fact, the case.
Will seems to adapt his personality to whoever
he is with — so what Hannibal sees may be
a reflection of himself, instead of the real
Will.
His interactions with Will are most likely
to be a matter of Hannibal interacting with
Will’s interpretation of Hannibal.
But this is the psychology of fictional characters
so take it with a grain of salt.
While the show begins as a kind of... best
possible version of a procedural cop drama,
the serial killing becomes a vessel for Hannibal
and Will to connect.
Two men who keep people at arms length because
they fear human contact for one reason or
another.
Through a discourse on why Will feels the
way he does, he is drawn to someone who offers
him clarity of identity.
And through the process of Will empathising
with monsters, Hannibal is comforted in knowing
that there is someone who could and would
understand him.
And while Hannibal takes peevish delight in
being beyond comprehension…
…Mads Michelson delivers a Hannibal that
is yearning for contact with a human from
whom he does not have to leverage emotional
intimacy with.
Now.
There’s hardly a discourse to be had here
that actively verifies the textual evidence
to confirm that Will and Hannibal are more
or less romantically engaged.
It really doubles down on the gay stuff as
the show goes on, but it was still there in
season 1.
But I’m not sure you can qualify it as GAY
representation in its purist sense.
Both because the show’s driving relationship
existed in subtext, but also because the development
of Will and Hannibal was focused around empathizing
with people who we maybe should not empathize
with.
But it’s some of the best and most insightful
queer coding that’s ever made it into a
visual medium.
These are two men, coping with different kinds
of deep-seeded trauma from their youth.
They keep themselves isolated and distant
because they are familiar with society’s
fear or disgust with what they are.
One hides in plain sight, holding a shield
of lavish opulence that enchants those around
him into believing that nobody this gentlemanly
and eccentric could be anything else.
The other, keeps himself physically distant,
preferring the unconditional friendship of
animals.
Brilliant, solitary, engrossed in their hobbies.
They dream of normality, paternity — being
in a family.
Though they have both reserved themselves
to their lives, and their fantasies.
And when they meet, by complete accident,
they recognize that they see their own fantasies
in the other, making steps to develop their
own kind of family — from the people who
need them most.
The main difference is that… one of them
knowingly eats people.
And this is just the thing, right?
It’s very clearly gay without saying it
is.
In fact, by all accounts, Bryan Fuller fully
intended to give Will and Hannibal an explicit
romantic arc.
Mads Michelson said that during the filming
of the last scene of Season 3, he was trying
very hard not to kiss Hugh Dancy.
That’s… not acting, apparently.
The intention to canonize the Hannibal and
Will relationship may also be one of the reasons
why NBC didn’t move ahead with a 4th season.
Because although there were lesbian characters
on the show, lesbians are famously more easy
to sell to advertisers.
Which is why you see a lot more lesbian rep
in kids cartoons these days.
But gay characters, at least gay lead characters,
are still something that network TV shies
away from.
It’s that threat of penetration that creeps
under the skin of a lot of executives and
viewers.
Subconsciously creating an unease around gay
men that isn’t there for gay women.
At least as long as the gay women look like
this.
But in spite of the avid, and continuing flow
of fan art depicting Mickelson and Dancy in
compromising postions donning varying degrees
of undress, I’m not only hesitant to label
this as good gay representation, I’m slightly
resistant to it.
God forbid we have a generation of gays who
describe themselves as a Hannigram power couple.
What they have, while intense and fun to watch,
is still… very toxic.
You’ve got a know-it-all, gaslighting, mansplainer
on one hand.
And on the other, you have a passive-aggressive,
self-victimizing martyr.
That should not be relationship goals.
And while there are fans who realize that
no, the point of the show is that you should
probably get some help if you see yourself
as Will and/or Hannibal, there’s quite a
romantic drive in the show’s fanbase.
I’ve even seen the show be compared abundantly
to the online comics Killing Stalking and
Warehouse, and I see where the take is coming
from, but I’m not entirely sure that I agree
with it.
Killing Stalking is a story about a serial
killer who has complete dominant control over
another man.
Who explicitly wants to use and exploit a
literal prisoner.
The added twist is that the prisoner is in
love with the captor — or at least thinks
he is.
This is less about relationship toxicity and
more a carnivalesque example of abuse in relationships.
Warehouse tells a story of assault and abuse
brought on by childhood trauma.
A revenge fantasy of sorts where neither of
the characters are all that likeable, and
after an untold amount of torture, the victim’s
mind breaks.
Leading to the victim accepting an actual
relationship with his abuser.
In both cases, the power dynamic is all off.
One character has far more power than the
other.
But Hannibal functions a little differently.
Will is rarely, if ever, a prisoner specifically
of Hannibal’s.
In fact, Hannibal is more often being held
captive in a situation Will had orchestrated
somehow.
This fits more of the bill of relationship
toxicity… because Hannibal is never really
trying to dominate will.
In season 1, Hannibal’s objective is to
manipulate Will into becoming something that
he is repressing.
He urges Will to admit that he enjoyed killing
someone that he had to kill to save another
life, and going further in the series, urges
Will to do it again.
Will does not realize that he’s being manipulated
by Hannibal though until Hannibal has already
perfectly framed him for the murder of multiple
people, resulting in Will being sent to a
hospital for the criminally insane.
Going into the second season is interesting
because Will has a greater awareness of Hannibal’s
methods.
He both trusts and distrusts Hannibal — and,
in an attempt to assassinate Hannibal while
he was inside the asylum — Will demonstrates
that he is willing and capable to take power
into his own hands.
Thereafter, the power-dynamic in their relationship
becomes much more evenly shared between them.
Each demonstrating that they are not willing
to tolerate the other’s bullshit.
But each demonstrating that they’re going
to keep getting up to their bullshit.
And yet… its also abundantly clear that
they would not have this kind of emotional
intimacy if they didn’t keep get up to their
bullshit at all.
These kinds of bitchy, catty relationships
are sort of ride or die situations that revolve
around a cycle of stockpiling emotions for
a once-a-year blowout fight.
Maybe part of them likes these fights?
Maybe they get bored and tired of people who
don’t play mind games?
Maybe they’re self-aware enough to know
that this is just who they are, and they know
that nobody else in the world is going to
put up with them.
There are darker sides to us, more intimate,
and personal parts.
Little back-brain remnants of feral humans
stuck in our heads.
These parts of us tell us to pit ourselves
against each other, seek supremacy, push ourselves
into authority, to seek our own pleasure at
the expense of others.
And yet, our society is so tightly constructed
around co-operation, civility, and respecting
the other that our feral-brains are not useful
for existing in this modern world.
It is, after all, the co-operation that has
allowed civilization to flourish.
We often hide these parts of ourselves.
Not because we’re embarrassed about them,
but because we acknowledge that there is almost
no way to function in society by letting these
internal savage parts of us bubble up to the
surface.
It’s not just everyone who we can let see
this part of ourselves.
Because by exposing these very closely guarded
artefacts of prehistoric human tribalism,
we are letting someone know that we, ourselves,
are aware that there are parts of us that
lack humanity.
And while everyone knows that we all have
corners of our mind that are still overgrown
and wild… it is not in good taste to admit
it.
There is always a risk that the person you
trust will point you out as a monster.
Hannibal and Will, in this sense, lucked out
with each other… or… were incredibly unlucky
to come across each other.
For both men have a capacity to read beyond
what the other is saying.
Their ability to reach each other fosters
a kindred sense of belonging.
For lack of literally anyone else who can
understand them, they crave connection in
each other.
Is this romantic?
Actually...
My significant argument about a situation
which separates an abusive relationship from
a romantic one is a matter of power.
Who has it in a relationship, and who is it
being taken from.
This is pivotal in understanding and interpreting
Killing Stalking and Warehouse.
And this is also the case in the first season
of Hannibal… where Will is mostly unaware
that he’s even being manipulated.
His subconscious is filling in the blanks
though.
However, as Will becomes more aware of who
and what Hannibal is… he begins to make
steps to reclaim his power.
In the second season, especially toward the
end, there could be an argument that Will
holds the greater amount of power because
Hannibal demonstrates abundantly that his
decisions are reactive to Will’s actions.
But by the end of the series, the question
arises of why Will and Hannibal stay ‘together’
in spite of lying, manipulation, entrapment,
killing each-others friends, killing their
own daughter-figure, tampering with evidence,
feeding their friends to each other, numerous
attempts to kill each other and a solid attempt
on one to ablate and eat the other’s brain.
On one hand, within the mythology of the show…
I just don’t think they’d be that interested
in each other if they didn’t pull this kind
of shit.
It’s like the Joker and Batman.
What would they have to do with themselves
if they didn’t have this other guy to keep
edging them on?
Their numerous attempts to kill each other
could easily be seen as a way of pressing
each-other’s buttons to see where the other
will draw the line at what they are willing
to tolerate.
But on the other hand…
The alternative is being alone.
You’ve let someone in your head, what happens
when you let them out?
Yet in spite of the murders and the cannibalism,
Will and Hannibal together establish an even
ground where the monstrous parts of themselves
are in the open.
Nobody would ever look past Hannibal’s cannibalism
or art piece murders.
But Will does.
Will looks at each of the Chesapeake Ripper
murders and thinks: who is the kind of person
doing this.
While everyone else thinks what kind of monster
would do this?
And similarly, Hannibal is the only person
willing or able to look past Will’s neuroses.
Alana Bloom refuses to romance Will because
she sees a subject.
Jack Crawford sees an ace-in-the-hole for
catching serial killers.
Hannibal sees a person.
So the pair of them can see past the monstrosities,
and appreciate the human being in the chair
across from the other.
So naturally… we, queer people are drawn
to this.
Because we, too, want people to look past
the homosexual, the bisexual, the transgender,
the genderqueer, nonbinary, fluid labels that
have been imposed upon us by society and ourselves.
We see what Will and Hannibal have and we,
too, see past the horror of the show, the
horrors that they put each other through.
Because it is not the horror we want, it is
the unconditional connection.
We can endure horror.
Each of us — we already have.
What we cannot endure is solitude.
In a discussion of representation, why would
we clamor for this, and yet leave Love, Simon
out to dry at the box office?
No discredit to Ms. Albertalli, but could
it be that queer people do not emotionally
engage with a teenage twink whose dream-style
love story goes off like choreographed fireworks?
Most of us have never experienced that.
But a toxic relationship we aren’t willing
to admit is toxic?
That’s far more likely.
And because of that, are we not more drawn
to the reflection of the darker part of us?
And while we don’t want straight people
en masse to think of us as cannibal serial
killers… we do like to see ourselves represented.
We want to see the darker parts of our lives
staring back at us from the other side of
a mirror, or camera.
Being gay isn’t pride floats and kissing
at the top of ferris wheels.
And neither is it the suffering that society
puts us through.
Not always.
When you stick a bunch of traumatized people
into a community, you’re going to get a
handful who don’t have the best ways of
coping with that.
And as people do, sometimes we just fall in
love with these monsters.
And our need for Will and Hannibal to find
a way to co-exist stems from our own memories…
wondering if there was any way we and our
exes could get over our drama and make it
work.
Because when you find someone who understands
you… who truly understands you… you want
to hold onto them forever…
Vampires have always been a little bit gay.
And they’ve always been part of human history,
believe it or not.
Though what we recognize as modern day vampires
is a product of the last five hundred years
or so, there are creatures which could resemble
Vampires going back to Ancient Rome.
The Greek Goddess Hecate, a triple deity,
was associated with magic, witchcraft, the
moon, the undead, the night, and wild, forested
areas.
She was said to turn women into creatures
which fed off the blood of men.
These women would either be vicious monsters,
or keep rural roads and paths safe for travelling
women.
Hecate herself was a later addition to the
Greek Pantheon, and some scholars believe
she was the Greek adaptation of a goddess
that may have originated in Egypt or what
is modern day Turkey.
Egypt itself possessing a version of vampires.
Though these figures being less monsters and
more the result of a society which religiously
revered a rigorous relationship between life
and death, and the pathways to and from either.
Blood is one of the earliest symbols that
humans associated with the concept of life
and death, for obvious reasons.
It’s not a stretch to say that our earliest
societies would have had a fixation on blood’s
symbolic ability to transfer life from one
to another.
In these days, vampires didn’t need to be
gay because everybody was gay.
And then Christianity took off for… a hot
minute and then before you knew it everything
that was interesting about human culture was
a sin or a demon.
So Vampires became more monstrous than they
already were.
The vampire especially was a symbol of distance
from God’s natural order.
Which… wasn’t much of a difference from
the way vampires had previously been depicted
violating the natural order of life and death.
Because it used to be you only went to hell
for committing cosmic treason, cheating death,
direct acts of warfare against the Gods, or
actively trying to end the world.
But these days, eternal damnation awaits you
for something as easy as masturbation.
And while once Vampires were beasts and monsters,
beholden to the whim of their associated deities,
vampires in christian orthodoxy were creatures
who had simply strayed from God’s plan and
protection.
As a result, they resembled not only monsters,
but men and women who embodied the antithesis
of the good christian citizen.
Ranging from cannibalism, sexual perversion,
and vast displays of opulence.
But it was never something explicitly explored
— instead vampires lived within folklore
as parables preaching the need to stay away
from people who exhibited un-christianly behaviour.
The 18th and 19th centuries marked a shift
in the way many people in Europe examined
their heritage and mythology.
Additionally spurred by the advent of the
printing press, allowing an ease-of-access
for increasingly literate populations, European
writers grew tired of dramatic wealthy families
and war stories.
Attention turned towards fantasy stories,
science fiction, a more gripping and tangible
expression of imagination.
And particularly, a re-examination outside
the rigid christian moral take of European
folklore.
And within this, we began to decode the queerness
of the vampire.
Even if we were just using vampires to call
out our queer friends for being jerks.
In 1819, John Polidori published The Vampyre.
In this story, the vampire, Lord Ruthven,
is written as an aristocratic seducer.
A rich man who has given up the idea of following
society’s norms.
This was a great fear in western Europe at
the time, by the way, especially among poorer
people.
The catholic church had maintained power for
nearly 1500 years thanks to a propaganda effort
that said that poverty was pivotal to morality
and getting into heaven.
The more accepting the poor were with poverty,
the less likely they would be to rise up against
the wealthy and powerful.
And it meant the church got to decide who
got to be wealthy and powerful.
Yet the projected messaging, and this was
heavily adopted by the poor, was that excessive
wealth was the most pivotal component in distancing
oneself from propper sexual conduct.
Specifically, homosexuality.
But Palidori wasn’t writing about the corruption
of homosexuality, oh no.
His Lord Ruthven was, quite obviously, the
real life Lord Byron — who… may or may
not have been a vampire himself.
But he was fabulously wealthy, fabulously
sexy, fabulously bisexual, and who Palidori
had been fabulously in love with for a time.
But Lord Byron got bored, and casually moved
on to suck the life out of some other, less
talented, sycophant.
Which normally wasn’t a problem, but Palidori
was salty enough that he was gonna tell the
world just what kind of sexy… irresistible
monster Lord George Gordon Byron actually
was.
And probably also how Palidori would take
him back in half a second if Byron came around.
We all know a guy like that, don’t we?
Later on in the century, In 1871, a vampire
story with — let’s say... ‘subtle’
lesbian undertones — “Carmilla” by Sheridan
Le Fanu, was published.
The idea of a vampire female presence was
nothing new, but one preying on other women
was revolutionary
and scandalous.
Feel like I could get demonetized for that.
And then came Dracula by Bram Stoker, who
many believe to have been a closeted gay man
in love with his employer, Henry Irving, who
many believe was the progenitor of the character
of Dracula, himself.
For this, Stoker himself was a young, impressionable
Johnathan Harker, trapped in the castle of
opulence, alone, with a man worth his obsession
— kept from his benign relationships with
women.
Dracula’s most famous screen incarnation,
the 1931 adaptation, which is actually adapted
more so from the play than the book for budgetary
reasons, was directed by Todd Browning, a
gay director.
And he made his Dracula sexy, exotic, and
fabulous with that flowing cape.
Throughout the mid 20th century vampires fell
into the realm of b-movie camp, having more
than one meet-up with Abbott and Costello.
And though many a gay man found ample sexual
tension between Christopher Lee’s Dracula
and Peter Kushing’s Van Helsing in the Hammer
horror classics, there wasn’t much to speak
of gay vampires in mainstream culture at the
time.
If you want more on Dracula’s queer coding,
my video Monsters in the Closet goes more
in depth on that.
The pre-Stonewall era for gay men in American
society was mostly a time of repression, fear,
and the darkness of the closet.
It was a time of conformity not just for gay
people, but everyone, who were expected to
play their role in order to keep America safe
from “Godless Communists.”
Senator Joseph McCarthy and his notoriously
closeted right hand man Roy Cohn (and others
of their ilk) were hunting not just communists
but gays as well.
There were congressional hearings aimed at
rooting “sexual perverts” out of government
jobs, and surveillance of the American postal
service for gay magazines continued until
1966.
The Lavender Menace knew no bounds.
Finally, as the 60’s hit its stride, the
sexual revolution began to take hold, and
the Stonewall riots forced mainstream America
to deal with the existence of gay men and
women… it was only a matter of time before
the gay vampire returned.
But this time he wasn’t a monster, but a
hero.
Ironically, a Byronic hero.
After the tragic loss of her young daughter
to leukaemia, an aspiring San Francisco based
writer named Anne Rice began dealing with
her grief by writing about creatures that
could, potentially, live forever.
Now before we get TOO far into Mrs. Rice I
want to cover the sticky subject of her opinion
on fan-fiction, since I know it’s a hot
button issue.
The Anne Rice V Fan Fiction war began around
the release of her novel Merrick, at the dawn
of the e-book revolution.
Her publisher, believing physical books were
dying, wanted to publish Merrick as an e-book
exclusive release.
And so they told Rice that any fan fiction
available online would cannibalize those ebook
sales, advising her to file a cease and desist
against all fan fiction websites.
The e-book exclusive of Merrick ended up doing
absolutely terrible sales, because e-books
were not taking over the world and most people
barely even knew they existed at the time,
and so a physical copy was eventually released.
But, due to some advice from her publisher,
Anne Rice has been known as the lady who hates
fan-fiction ever since.
Even though in 2012 she said:
However, Rice’s adventures in publishing
began much earlier than Ebooks and the internet.
In her premier novel, Interview With The Vampire,
she used these creatures as sympathetic heroes.
Through them, she conceptualized both the
concepts of death and the illusion of immortality.
However, her vampires weren’t going to get
weighed down with all that coding and subtext
brought about by Christian conservatism.
Her vampires were gonna be here and (mostly)
queer.
As a woman who lived in San Francisco, and
who openly engaged with queer elements of
The City in the 60s and 70s, she took on by
osmosis, the internal lifestyle struggles
of the queer community.
Their lives, their heartbreaks, and the ways
that their ostracised existence generated
problems that would not typically be seen
or understood in straight circles.
But Anne Rice was going to make straight people
understand it… by making them vampires.
Vampires who, in spite of being monsters,
she made you sympathise with.
Published in 1976, Rice’s first novel: Interview
With The Vampire, tells the story of Louis
De Point Du Lac, an immigrant to America in
1791, who ran a plantation just outside of
New Orleans.
A happy man, he cared for his mother and sister,
as well as a younger brother Paul, a very
religious man who claimed to see angelic visions
regularly.
After an argument in which Paul told Louis
that the Virgin Mary had come to him and told
him to sell the plantation, Paul accidentally
died, though some believed it was suicide,
and others believe the he’d simply seen
god.
Louis took to drinking to cope with the grief,
and moved to New Orleans, not really caring
for this whole ‘life’ thing much anymore.
Which is when he met Lestat De Lioncourt,
a vampire who grooms Louis into accepting
the dark gift himself.
Eternity in the night doesn’t really…
make Louis feel any better though, naturally.
His eternity began while he thought of nothing
but the loss of his loved one, and for the
rest of his eternity that is who he would
be.
While Lestat tries to win Louis over with
gifts and companionship, their relationship
develops with an unhealthy amount of gaslighting.
And once again we see a pair of men slip into
a codependent relationship where neither is
particularly welcome anywhere else but each
other’s company.
For Lestat, this arrangement offers him a
feeling of importance, and someone he can
‘fix.’
And for Louis, this arrangement offers him
someone who can make him feel anything at
all.
And though they enjoy being with each other,
to a point, what they dislike is that they
have no other option but to be with each other.
Who else would accept them?
Who else could?
It doesn’t help that Lestat is consistently
rolling his eyes at Louis because this boy
still hasn’t gotten over his catholic hang-ups
and refuses to drink the blood of another
human.
Just rats.
When he finally does drink from a person,
it’s a lonely, dying girl who’s weeping
over the corpse of her mother who had died
from the plague.
He nearly drains the girl and then flees.
Only to find Lestat waiting for him at home
with the girl, ready to turn her into a vampire
so that Louis and he can have a daughter,
Claudia.
So they can be the gay dads!
It takes some convincing but Louis gives in,
creating a daughter who will never physically
age.
Because like every other couple who shacked
up together too quick to find the magic fading
just as fast, they think a child is gonna
fix everything.
Claudia herself grows up, trapped in a child’s
body though with the temperament and desires
of a grown woman.
Over the years, she fosters positive relationships
with her fathers, drawing close to either
for different reasons.
She is more gentle and nurturing than Lestat,
and empathises with Louis over their shared
trauma — the loss of family.
And yet, she gives into the darkness where
Louis wont, going on nightly hunts with Lestat
for human blood.
But, as time passes, Louis and Claudia decide
that Louis really needs to break up with Lestat.
That’s he’s abusive, and gas lighty, and
needs to go.
And so they kill him.
Well they kill him a few times because he’s
a vampire and he doesn’t take to death well.
They don’t even manage to kill him when
they do kill him.
Why?
Because Lestat is a bad ass bitch.
But they do manage to escape to Europe, where
they hunt around for other vampires like them,
eventually finding a troop in Paris lead by
Armand, who in the books is a Ukrainian teenaged
twink described as:
But in the movie is…
Antonio Banderas.
Slight difference in interoperation, really.
But I understand it would have been hard to
have this scene between Brad Pitt and a sixteen
year old boy.
One might wonder why Anne Rice would create
a vampire so young and yet so adult as Armand?
But once again, Anne Rice was writing in 1970s
San Francisco.
How many gay and trans teenaged runaways would
she have met who could have told her forty
years worth of life experiences, with an emotional
wisdom of someone even older?
Because as is common with her vampires, they
carry a kind of trauma with them.
Oftentimes, they are vampires because of their
trauma.
And yet, like us, they treat each other as
their trauma demands.
Either they inflict it on each other, or they
fear exposure to others, letting their trauma
twist and manipulate others away from who
they are — to fall in love with the facade,
never to let the face underneath see the light
of day.
And… these vampires hurt each other.
Louis does not and cannot trust Armand.
And Armand, in turn, hurts Louis.
Claudia dies, and the mask of immortality
shatters, and even Armand is no longer a child,
but a monster whose gruesome visage is a youthful
face which conceals centuries of schemes and
horrors.
Paradise lost.
Anne Rice let her Vampires rest in peace for
nearly ten years after that book.
But then, following her writing Cry to Heaven,
a very bisexual book about the castrati of
Italy, and the Sleeping Beauty Books, which
basically explore every kink and sexual orientation
imaingibale.
We finally got the sequel to Interview with
the Vampire…
The Vampire Lestat.
Typifying that there are “two sides to every
story”, we have Lestat’s take on the events
that Louis had described.
But while John Polidori’s Vampyre was marred
in queer subtext, Anne Rice was over that
shit.
No subtext.
No bachelors living together with ambiguous
shared parental responsibilities.
Lestat’s queer.
He’s gay.
That’s it.
He’s gay, he lives with his boyfriend, and
they’re theatre queens.
Lestat leaves his crumbling family estate
to live with the love of his life, Nicolas
de Lenfent, who he lovingly refers to as Nicky.
Nicky is a musician, and Lestat is an actor,
and they live together in Paris helping to
run a small theatre.
And they’re not best friends.
They’re not roommates.
Rice makes it abundantly clear that they are
lovers.
When Lestat is turned into a vampire by his
suicidal maker, Magnus, he hides from Nicky.
Scared that he’ll be rejected.
But Nicky believes that it is Lestat who had
rejected him, even though Lestat sends him
expensive gifts like a Stradivarius violin.
The abandonment that so many of us in the
queer community fear sends Nicky into a spiraling
state of depression.
When he finally does meet with Lestat once
more, he begs to become a vampire.
At first Lestat refuses though eventually
gives in, but while turning Nicky he senses
the darkness in Nicky’s soul that has developed
because of his depression.
He can feel the love of his life slipping
away, even as he holds him closer than ever
before.
After becoming a vampire Nicky becomes nearly
catatonic, and eventually slips away from
Lestat entirely.
And after centuries of dealing with depression
and severe mental illness, Nicky kills himself.
In a later book when Lestat travels to heaven
and hell— (Yes this happens.
Maybe, sort of, it's complicated.)
—he searches for Nicky’s soul but can’t
find him in either realm.
Leading to many years of solitude for Lestat,
mourning the complete and utter loss of his
Nicky.
Lestat and Nicky aren’t the only queer characters
in The Vampire Lestat though.
Most of the characters seem at least queer
adjacent, but the one that stands out the
most to me is Gabrielle, Lestat’s mother.
After becoming a vampire, Lestat turns his
sickly mother as well.
Upon her birth as a vampire, Gabrielle takes
on the appearance of a man, wearing only men’s
clothing and courting women.
Becoming, arguably, a trans or gender queer
character in the mid eighties.
She and Lestat stayed together for a long
while until just shortly after the French
Revolution when she leaves him.
As Rice’s vampire novels, which became known
as The Vampire Chronicles, continued, the
overall pansexuality of vampires was further
explored.
Since any vampire can seemingly fall in love
with any person, no matter their sex or gender
expression.
Male characters are often referred to as beautiful,
while women are called handsome.
Rice has spoken about her depiction of gay
vampires:
Anne Rice created a world that the queer community
felt wolcomed into, and one we felt we knew.
One of characters perceived as monsters by
many, and fetishized by others.
Where living forever was a possibility, but
where some vampires would go insane because
of being alone.
And that even for the brat-prince Lestat himself,
the anxiety of being alone is palpable.
It’s no surprise that anxiety is prevelant
in the queer community.
We’ve been outcast for one reason or another
— even those of us who are accepted by their
families.
Members of the queer community feel a desperate
need for connection.
For community.
For knowing we’re not alone in the world.
Much like Louis and Lestat travelled to Europe
and Northern Africa to find others like them,
in their respective books, we too search out
others like us.
But we’re not always welcomed into the community.
We don’t always find the fabled found family.
And so when someone does come along… even
if they’re monstrous, we may attach to them
out of necessity.
And never let them go.
We may change ourselves to be what they want,
and ask only for their company in return.
This is especially true for marginalized communities
within our marginalized community.
Queers who live with disabilities, or who
are mentally ill.
When being queer isn’t the only reason someone
might not love you, we’ll hold on to whatever
and whoever we can get.
No matter what they do to us.
No matter how little we mean to them.
Because at least we mean something to them.
As we engage with our media, the relationship
between queer people and monsters becomes
stronger.
There’s always been a component of monstrousness
in the inner circles of queer spaces — specifically
in the areas of kink, drag, and performance.
It should come as a surprise to no one that
the booming popularity of adults going into
mouth-foaming frenzies for halloween arose
as queer people began receiving social and
political recognition
Queer people have a fascination with costumes
— and this is something documented for most
of our time in recorded history.
As social outsiders, there’s nothing more
appealing than becoming someone who is publicly
accepted.
Even if that costume was just a plain old
normal person.
When what’s under your skin is decried as
being freakish, you begin to see everything
as a costume — especially the conventions
of society that are taken for granted.
The business suit.
The Sunday dress.
The fake smile.
The things you wear to fit in with the straights.
Alternately, where once we were artists, creators,
rule breakers in our day to day lives, now
our creativity and rule-breaking may be tolerated
for certain events.
Halloween.
Pride parades.
Certain fairs where we can be ourselves.
And then there are the… twinks and gym bunnies
who put on a jock strap and harness and dance
on some tables.
A costume all its own.
A problem with focusing so clearly on Halloween
and pride week as spaces where ‘true selves’
are acceptable is that we are being harassed
out of being our ‘true selves’ for the
rest of the year.
If you’re so excited for pride week so that
you can be a seven-day slut, why are you so
ashamed of sexual promiscuity for the other
fifty-one weeks?
Obviously, this is how you want to live your
life — why are you tolerating only ONE week
where this behaviour is ‘permissible’
or even only tolerable by straight social-gatekeepers?
Modern manifestations of queer circles are
facing these struggles, as the cisgender-heterosexual
hegimony imparts more and more statutes for
conditional tolerance.
You can be accepted, but only if you can check
off A, B, and C on the application for public
recognition.
This is just a more nuanced version of outrightly
shutting out these identities and lifestyles
as a whole.
Instead, SOME queer people can naturally fit
into these parameters.
Others will force themselves to conform for
the sake of social comforts and conveniences.
Others are either unable to conform, or refuse
to.
And why should they have to?
Forcing hegemonistic spaces to remove restrictions
on a social definition of personhood — rather
than broadening an increasingly-complex cataloge
of valid identities — should be the main
objective of queer rights, I think.
Instead, we record and document every sub-genre
of sexuality and gender — deciding who can
be valid and when.
Instead of just realizing it’s nobody’s
business and letting people live their lives…
we are relegating queer noncomformists to
exist in the shadows.
And in the shadows, there are always monsters.
Given that queer circles at large were once
forced to live in the shadows, maybe this
is why we’ve always been drawn to the monsters
within them.
There’s also a theatrical element to the
beast, isn’t there?
An ethereal fantasy constructed around the
Alfar of northern europe.
The strength and poise of the faefolk of the
Celts.
Oberon, The Earlking, and their court of nature
spirits of southern France and Germany that
survived the collapse of the Roman Empire.
All stories banned by the authority of the
Catholic Church.
And each figure recategorized as a servant
of Satan.
But the nature of our secret, solicit meetings
facilitated an exchange of ideas between the
rich, the educated, and those lacking in either.
Why wouldn’t the young, poor, rentboy growing
up on the streets of London be enchanted by
pillow-talk lessons of creatures and heroes
from an era where same-gender attraction was
not so taboo?
In which case, I may be suggesting that our
love of monsters — both academic and fetishistic
— is a matter of carrying on the stories
and traditions from pagan cultures where our
identities and expressions of sexuality did
not hold the same taboo, as it has for the
last fifteen hundred years.
This proves to us that a world can exist where
we can live without homophobic and transphobic
baggage.
Our freedom, our pride, does not need to be
fiction because our ancestors got by just
fine without homophobia.
We see that homophobia is in contradiction
to social cohesion, progress, social institutions,
trade, commerce, or family structures.
Maybe that gives us hope that it could be
different one day, or that we could eek out
our own existence where we can make this once-truth
a present day reality.
The need to build a community has translated
into the trope of found family.
Which itself is a defense mechanism from — to
this day — living in a world where your
family may push you out if you don’t fit
their checklist of acceptable identities.
Found family wasn’t intended to be a fiction
trope about a plucky group of misfits coming
together for a shared purpose.
It was necessary for queer survival — not
for the survival of our community… no, actual
survival of individuals.
The alternative was filling the streets with
disowned and desperate queer youth.
And if there is one area where fiction and
reality overlap, it’s that monsters feed
on desperation.
There are quiet corners of queer history that
we’ve omitted from the discussion at large.
These are specifically rooted in white colonial
circles; and subsequently focused on a dynamic
of privilege, power, and exploitation.
Given that queer identity for a large section
of history was, itself, illegal, there were
almost no legislative protections that queer
people would have been able to seek out.
Doubly true is that law enforcement itself
has had a history of targeting queer individuals
and whole communities alike.
A gay street kid who gets assaulted by an
established, closeted man has no legal recourse.
But even more unsettling are the ways that
we, as disowned and desperate people, tolerated
these abusive partners simply because the
alternative was a never-ending cycle of shelters,
dark allies, and drugs.
As an example, the culture of the ‘houseboy’
had been a staple of the gay community, and
to some, an indication of status and success.
Wealthy gays taking on young gay men, offering
room and board in exchange for eye candy,
performing household chores, and sexual favours.
The latter of which would often be extended
to friends and guests, at the patron’s whim.
The end result was a socially-accepted precedence
for a power dynamic that exploited vulnerability.
That isn’t to say that all those who provided
shelter to younger gay men were predatory.
That also isn’t to say that all of these
arrangements violated consent.
But the fact that it was so accepted as status-quo
is what should be troubling.
But the power dynamic within the culture certainly
made for an enticing opportunity for some
— to match the monstrous elements of themselves
with the perceived success that home-cleaning
concubines indicated to other queers.
We may never know the degree of exploitation
that has occurred within this very community.
Because there are good Samaritans in the world,
who do aim for the comfort of others.
But for each one of these, how many are there
who get drunk off of having a desperate boy
at their mercy?
The monster, after all, does not know it is
a monster.
A monster is as they have always been: they
do what is natural to them.
And it is those outside who place labels on
the monster.
Or, are we so desperate to live out these
monster fables that we seek them out?
We want to be both damsels in need of rescue,
and also chrome-clad knights.
And it may not be the princess or Prince we
want to save from the monster, but the monster
from itself.
Through the process of wanting to redeem the
monster in ourselves, we may seek out other
monsters who neither see the need for their
own redemption nor do they feel that they
do anything requiring redemption.
With them we remain, sinking into habits and
patterns, where their monstrous behaviour
becomes our normal over time.
And those watching us simply cannot understand
why.
This is by no way something only present in
queer circles, but we tend to frame our lives
in ways that mimmic the media we watch.
We see these squabbles, these fights, these
struggles play out over a few seasons of television,
or over the course of a film.
We feel this immense fulfilment over seeing
a satisfying conclusion, over the resolution
of drama, the poetic justice of everyone finally
understanding your side of the story, after
the evil monster is recognized as a sympathetic
man.
And everyone just decides to forgive and forget
the ways they hurt others.
But Real life doesn’t have a plot.
Real life does not have a resolution and nor
will there ever be.
Not as we’d understand it.
So our attempts to find meaning and significance
in what happens is a matter of us superimposing
our own understanding of literary devices
and dramatic licence upon the events that
happen around us in real life.
And always in a way which feed into our own
story, our own character development.
And some of us want our story to be about
turning the beast into a prince.
I can’t think of a single queer person who
has not gone through some kind of abusive
relationship – and that’s even outside
our garden-variety trauma.
We all have that one ex who, if they didn’t
outright abuse us, treated us like they were
the most important thing in our lives.
Like we couldn't exist without them.
Some of us have more than one, of course.
And yet… we all know exactly why we stuck
around for so long.
Why we tolerated the behaviour, the treatment.
Because the alternative was being alone.
The alternative was not being understood.
Even if the alternative was not explicit rejection,
maybe it’s just as bad to earn indifference.
And regardless of the behaviour…
That one person ‘got’ you.
They understood you.
In fact, that kind of emotional proximity
is exactly why they were able to twist you
around the rusty nails they pounded into your
heart.
They knew where your heart was… when nobody
else cared enough to look for it.
And leaving them?
Even if you did find somebody else… would
they ever understand you the way the monster
had?
Human survival has depended on establishing
connections with others.
So how can anyone say that it’s your fault
for craving that connection with a monster
over no connection at all?
So much of queer horror is about the aspects
of our culture that straight people fear,
that straight society fears: women's strength
and independence, men's vulnerability and
intimacy, the upending of gender and family
roles, the rejection of the primacy of reproduction,
the hollowness and bankruptcy of the dominant
social structures, and challenges to the Church's
pronouncements.
And our inherent invisibility, our cunning—that
we might be anyone, anywhere, lurking in plain
sight.
I have to confess, there's something delectable
about the fact that we would cause so much
anxiety, and anguish, and unreasonable, unwarranted
fear simply by existing.
There seems to be great power in that.
Aside from the obvious, what are queer people
terrified of?
Of course, we are scared of death, as well
as violence, torture, sickness, and suffering,
as well as being exposed, humiliated, shunned,
and persecuted.
We are concerned about being erased, unseen,
or forgotten.
We're terrified of being alone.
But being queer is sometimes about all of
those things; they are at the heart of our
history and the source of our oppression.
Being queer sometimes means being cast out;
other times, it means casting ourselves out,
walking or running away from abusive families
and partners while we still can.
Being queer sometimes means being the sympathetic
beast.
Frankenstein’s monster.
Just yearning to be left alone.
To live our lives.
Depending upon where in the world you live
being queer can mean losing your family, your
friends, your religion.
The pillars of society that held you up and
now you’re left alone, forced to fight for
yourself because sometimes no one else is
willing to fight for you.
Like the victim of a slasher movie, you’ve
watched as everything and everyone you held
dear drops around you.
But there’s strength there.
Because sometimes, after everything and everyone
has been stripped from us, sometimes being
queer means being the last one standing.